@node Drawing Two-Dimensional Images
@chapter Drawing Two-Dimensional Images

@menu
* Image Architecture::
* Reading Image Files::
@end menu

@node Image Architecture
@section Image Architecture

@menu
* Images::
* Utility Functions::
@end menu

@node Images
@subsection Images

Images are all rectangular arrangements of pixels.  The type of a pixel
depends on the exact type of the image.  In addition, a pixel has a
color which also depends on the exact type of the image.  You can think
of the color as an interpretation of the pixel value by the type of
image.

The coordinate system of an image has (0,0) in its upper-left corner.
The x coordinate grows to the right and the y coordinate downwards.

@deftp {Protocol Class} image

This class is the base class for all images.
@end deftp

@deffn {Generic Function} {image-width} image
@end deffn
@deffn {Generic Function} {image-height} image

This function returns the width and the height of the image
respectively.
@end deffn

@deffn {Generic Function} {image-pixels} image

This function returns a two-dimensional array of pixels, whose element
type depends on the exact subtype of the image.
@end deffn

@deffn {Generic Function} {image-pixel} image x y

This function returns the pixel at the coordinate indicated by the
values of x and y.  The type of the return value depends on the exact
image type.
@end deffn

@deffn {Generic Function} {(setf image-pixel)} x y pixel image

Set the value of the pixel at the coordinate indicated by the values of
x and y.  The exact type acceptable for the pixel argument depends on
the exact subtype of the image.  If x or y are not within the values of
the width and height of the image, an error is signaled.
@end deffn

@deffn {Generic Function} {image-color} image x y

This function returns the color value of the pixel indicated by the
values of x and y.  The exact type of the return value depends on the
specific subtype of the image.
@end deffn

@deffn {Generic Function} {(setf image-color)} x y color image

Set the color value of the pixel at the coordinate indicated by the
values of x and y.  The exact type acceptable for the color argument
depends on the exact subtype of the image.  In addition, the exact color
given to the pixel may be an approximation of the value of the color
argument.  For instance, if the image is a gray-level image, then the
color given will correspond to the intensity value of the color
argument.  If x or y are not within the values of the width and height
of the image, an error is signaled.
@end deffn

@deftp {Protocol Class} spectral-image

This class is a subclass of the image class.  It is the root of a
subhiearchy for manipulating images represented in various spectral
formats, other than RGB.  [This subhierarchy will be elaborated later in
the context of the color model of Strandh and Braquelaire].
@end deftp

@deftp {Protocol Class} rgb-image

This class is a subclass of the image class.  It is the root of a
subhierarchy for manipulating images whose pixel colors are represented
as RGB coordinates.  The function image-color always returns a value of
type (unsigned-byte 24) for images of this type, representing three
different intensity values of 0-255.
@end deftp

@deftp {Protocol Class} truecolor-image

This class is a subclass of the rgb-image class.  Images of this class
have pixel values of type (unsigned-byte 24).  The pixel values directly
represent RGB values.
@end deftp

@deftp {Protocol Class} colormap-image

This class is a subclass of the rgb-image class.  Images of this class
have pixel values that don't directly indicate the color of the pixel.
The translation between pixel value and color may be implicit (as is the
case of gray-level images) or explicit with a colormap stored in the
image object.
@end deftp

@deftp {Protocol Class} gray-level-image

This class is a subclass of the colormap-image class.  Images of this
type have pixel values that implicitely represent a gray-level.  The
function pixel-color always returns an RGB value that corresponds to the
identical intensities for red, green, and blue, according to the pixel
value.
@end deftp

@deffn {Generic Function} {gray-image-max-levels} gray-level-image

This function returns the maximum number of levels of gray that can be
represented by the image.  The value returned by this function minus one
would yield a color value of 255,255,255 if it were the value of a
pixel.
@end deffn

@deffn {Generic Function} {gray-image-max-level} gray-level-image

This function returns the maximum level currently present in the image.
This function may be very costly to compute, as it might have to scan
the entire image.
@end deffn

@deffn {Generic Function} {gray-image-min-level} gray-level-image

This function returns the minimum level currently present in the image.
This function may be very costly to compute, as it might have to scan
the entire image.
@end deffn

@deftp {Class} {256-gray-level-image}

This class is a subclass of the gray-level-image class.  Images of this
type have pixels represented as 8-bit unsigned pixels.  The function
image-pixel always returns a value of type (unsigned-byte 8) for images
of this type.  The function gray-image-max-levels returns 256 for all
instances of this class.
@end deftp

@deftp {Class} {binary-image}

This class is a subclass of the gray-level-image class.  Images of this
type have pixel values of type bit.  The function image-pixel returns
values of type bit when applied to an image of this type.  The function
pixel-color returns 0,0,0 for zero-valued bits and 255,255,255 for
one-valued bits.
@end deftp

@node Utility Functions
@subsection Utility Functions

@deffn {Generic Function} {rotate-image} image angle &key (antialias t)
@end deffn
@deffn {Generic Function} {flip-image} {image ...}
@end deffn
@deffn {Generic Function} {translate-image} {image ...}
@end deffn
@deffn {Generic Function} {scale-image} {image ...}
 ...
@end deffn

@node Reading Image Files
@section Reading Image Files

@deffn {Generic Function} {read-image} source &key type width height

Read an image from the source.  The source can be a pathname designator
(a string or a path), or a stream.  The caller can supply a value for
type, width, and height for sources that don't indicate these values.  A
value of nil for type means recognize the type automatically.  Other
values for type are :truecolor (an array of 3-byte color values)
:256-gray-level (an array of 1-byte gray-level values) :binary (an array
of bits).
@end deffn

@deffn {Generic Function} {write-image} image destination &key (type :pnm) (quality 1)

Write the image to the destination.  The destination can be a pathname
designator (a string or a path), or a stream.  Valid values of type are
:pnm (pbm, pgm, or ppm according to the type of image), :png, :jpeg,
(more...).  The quality argument is a value from 0 to 1 and indicates
desired image quality (for formats with lossy compression).
@end deffn
