@node Drei Commands
@section Drei Commands

@menu
* Syntax Command Table Protocol::
* Numeric Argument in Drei Commands::
@end menu

Drei commands are standard CLIM commands that are stored in standard
CLIM command tables. Drei uses a number of distinct command tables, some
of which are merely used to group commands by category, and some whose
contents may only be applicable under specific circumstances. When the
contents of a command table are applicable, that command table is said
to be active. Some syntaxes may define specific command tables that will
only be active for buffers using that syntax. Commands in such tables
are called @dfn{syntax-specific commands}.

@node Syntax Command Table Protocol
@subsection Syntax Command Table Protocol
@cindex syntax command table

In order to provide conditionally active command tables, Drei defines
the @class{syntax-command-table} class. While this class is meant to
facilitate the addition of commands to syntaxes when they are run in a
specific context (for example, a large editor application adding a
@command{Show Macroexpansion} command to Lisp syntax), their modus
operandi is general enough to be used for all conditional activity of
command tables. This is useful for making commands available that
could not be generally implemented for all Drei instances ---
returning to the @command{Show Macroexpansion} example, such a command
can only be implemented if there is a sufficiently large place to show
the expansion, and this might not be available for a generic Drei
input-editor instance, but could be provided by an application
designed for it.

Syntax command tables work by conditionally inheriting from other
command tables, so it is necessary to define one (or more) command
tables for the commands you wish to make conditionally available.

When providing a @var{:command-table} argument to
@fmacro{define-syntax} that names a syntax command table, an instance
of the syntax command table will be used for the syntax.

@sref{Syntax Command Table Protocol Reference}

@node Numeric Argument in Drei Commands
@subsection Numeric Argument in Drei Commands
@cindex numeric argument

The numeric argument state is currently not directly accessible from
within commands. However, Drei uses ESA's numeric argument processing
code --- thus, Drei commands can be provided with numeric arguments in the
same way as ESA commands can. When using @cl{set-key} to setup
keybindings, provide the value of @cl{*numeric-argument-marker*} as an
argument to have the command processing code automatically insert the
value of the numeric argument whenever the keybinding is invoked. You
can also use @cl{*numeric-argument-p*} to have a boolean value, stating
whether or not a numeric argument has been provided by the user,
inserted. Note that you must write your commands to accept arguments
before you can do this - @pxref{Defining Drei Commands}.
